Donald Savage
Headquarters, Washington       Jan. 10, 2003
(Phone: 202/358-1547)

RELEASE: 03-009

RESEARCHERS SEEK "HEART" OF BLACK HOLE MYSTERY

     New research, funded by NASA and the University of 
Tokyo, has shown astronomers may not yet have uncovered the 
mystery at the heart of one of the Galaxy's oldest star 
systems, the globular cluster M15.

In September, observations made using NASA's Hubble Space 
Telescope (HST) seemed to indicate the presence of a mid-size 
black hole, several thousand times more massive than the Sun, 
in the hearts of two clusters of stars. The observations were 
the foundation for a claim that intermediate-mass black holes 
had at last been discovered. By comparison, stellar-mass 
black holes are only a few times the mass of our Sun. 
Galactic-center black holes are millions or even billions of 
times more massive than our Sun.

New detailed computer simulations, published in the 
Astrophysical Journal, show a different way to interpret the 
same data. Instead of a new mid-size black hole of unknown 
origin in M15, the Hubble data have a more mundane 
explanation - a dense clump of stellar remnants, the products 
of normal stellar evolution, in the cluster's core. The 
cluster may contain a small black hole or maybe none at all. 
The simulations did not address the other star cluster, 
called G1, in which evidence for an intermediate-mass black 
hole was reported at around the same time as the M15 results 
were released.

The question of what lurks at the center of M15 has kept 
astronomers busy for at least two decades. At various times, 
claims have been made that M15 must harbor a central black 
hole. The claims were based on the high density of stars in 
the cluster's congested core and on other tantalizing hints. 
Hints like stars near the center seemed to be orbiting faster 
than would be expected if only their own gravity were binding 
them to the cluster. This would be the telltale gravitational 
signature of an unseen mass hiding in M15's core.

A team of astronomers used the HST for several years to probe 
M15's secrets. A few months ago, the answer to the decades-
long question of the possible black hole in M15 seemed to be 
at hand. After a painstaking analysis of HST data, using 
earlier model calculations by Indiana University researchers, 
the team reported evidence for a central black hole.

Within hours of the team's announcement, astronomers around 
the world were carefully studying the paper and its exciting 
conclusions, which were also rather surprising, since the 
Indiana group had previously published models that produced 
high velocities near the center of M15 without the need for a 
black hole.

An international group of researchers, using the world's 
fastest computer, the GRAPE-6 system in Japan, were engaged 
in a series of simulations of star clusters that resembled 
M15. They used the GRAPE-6 to perform independent tests of 
the M15 black hole claim. The GRAPE's detailed, star-by-star 
simulations represent the state of the art in cluster 
modeling. Using this unique tool, the team found they could 
reproduce the M15 observations without the need for a central 
black hole. The GRAPE team's members are Jun Makino and 
Holger Baumgardt, of Tokyo University; Piet Hut, of the 
Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J.; Steve 
McMillan, from Drexel University in Philadelphia; and Simon 
Zwart, from the University of Amsterdam in the Netherlands.

When the GRAPE researchers notified the HST team of their 
results, they learned the Hubble team, along with members of 
the Indiana University group, had reached a similar 
conclusion. All three groups agreed that a black hole, if 
present, had to be significantly smaller than originally 
reported. One of the figures in the original paper, published 
by the Indiana group, had been labeled incorrectly, throwing 
off the later analysis of the Hubble observations.

The GRAPE group's results appear in the Jan. 1, 2003, issue 
of the Astrophysical Journal. The amended Hubble results are 
in January's Astronomical Journal. An addendum to the earlier 
paper by the Indiana group will appear in the March 1, 2003, 
issue of the Astrophysical Journal.

-end-


